The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Short Cut to Better Jams and Jellies, by
Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A Short Cut to Better Jams and Jellies

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: June 4, 2021 [eBook #65506]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SHORT CUT TO BETTER JAMS AND
JELLIES ***




                            _A SHORT CUT to_
                        Better Jams and Jellies


  Perfect Jams and Jellies                                       PAGE 31
  The Short-Boil Method                                               31
  Steps to Follow                                                    4-5
  Jelly Recipes                                                     6-16
  Jam Recipes                                                      19-30
  Do’s and Don’ts                                                  17-18


              Certo Division of General Foods Corporation
                        Fairport, N.Y., U. S. A.
            Copyrighted 1943, U. S. A., General Foods Corp.




                         INDEX TO JELLY RECIPES


  PAGE
  Apple Jelly                                                         11
  Apricot Jelly                                                       15
  Beach Plum Jelly                                                    12
  Blackberry Jelly                                                     8
  Blueberry and Sour Cherry Jelly                                     15
  Boysenberry Jelly                                                    8
  Canned Fruit Jelly                                                   8
  Cherry, Sour, Jelly                                                  8
  Cherry, Sour, and Blueberry Jelly                                   15
  Cherry, Sour, and Gooseberry Jelly                                  16
  Cherry, Wild, Jelly                                                 14
  Chokecherry Jelly                                                   14
  Crabapple Jelly                                                     11
  Cranberry and Quince Jelly                                          13
  Currant, Red, Jelly                                                  7
  Currant and Raspberry Jelly                                          9
  Currant and Strawberry Jelly                                        14
  Dewberry Jelly                                                       8
  Elderberry Jelly                                                     9
  Gooseberry Jelly                                                    12
  Gooseberry and Sour Cherry Jelly                                    16
  Grape Jelly                                                      7, 10
  Grape Jelly, Bottled Juice                                          10
  Grapefruit Jelly                                                    11
  Guava Jelly                                                         13
  Lime Jelly                                                          16
  Loganberry Jelly                                                     8
  Mint Jelly                                                          12
  Peach Jelly                                                         11
  Pineapple Jelly                                                     15
  Plum Jelly                                                          10
  Pomegranate Jelly                                                   16
  Prune Jelly                                                         10
  Quince Jelly                                                        13
  Quince and Cranberry Jelly                                          13
  Raspberry, Black, Jelly                                              9
  Raspberry, Red, Jelly                                                8
  Raspberry and Currant Jelly                                          9
  Rhubarb Jelly                                                        9
  Rhubarb and Strawberry Jelly                                        14
  Strawberry Jelly                                                  6, 8
  Strawberry and Currant Jelly                                        14
  Youngberry Jelly                                                     8


To obtain additional local-fruit recipes write General Foods, 250 Park
Ave., New York, N. Y.




          INDEX TO JAMS ... RELISHES MARMALADES ... CONSERVES


  PAGE
  Apricot Jam                                                         22
  Apricot, Dried, and Pineapple Jam                                   24
  Blackberry Jam                                                      19
  Blueberry Jam                                                       24
  Blueberry and Raspberry Jam                                         30
  Boysenberry Jam                                                     19
  Canned Fruit Jam                                                    19
  Cherry Conserve                                                     26
  Cherry Jam                                                          26
  Cranberry Conserve                                                  28
  Cranberry Jam                                                       28
  Cranberry Marmalade                                                 28
  Currant, Red, Jam                                                   20
  Currant and Raspberry Jam                                           21
  Currant Relish                                                      20
  Dewberry Jam                                                        19
  Fig Jam                                                             23
  Ginger Marmalade                                                    28
  Gooseberry Jam                                                      20
  Gooseberry and Raspberry Jam                                        23
  Grape Butter                                                         7
  Grape Conserve                                                      25
  Grape Jam                                                           22
  Grapefruit Marmalade                                                27
  Huckleberry Jam                                                     24
  Loganberry Jam                                                      29
  Orange Marmalade                                                    27
  Orange and Grapefruit Marmalade                                     27
  Peach Jam                                                           20
  Peach Marmalade                                                     25
  Pear Jam                                                            20
  Pineapple, Canned, Jam                                              30
  Pineapple, Fresh, Jam                                               21
  Pineapple and Apricot, Dried, Jam                                   24
  Pineapple and Strawberry Jam                                        24
  Plum Jam                                                            26
  Prune Jam                                                           26
  Quince Jam                                                          27
  Raspberry Jam                                                       29
  Raspberry and Blueberry Jam                                         30
  Raspberry and Currant Jam                                           21
  Raspberry and Gooseberry Jam                                        23
  Rhubarb Jam                                                         21
  Rhubarb and Strawberry Jam                                          30
  Strawberry Jam                                                   6, 19
  Strawberry and Pineapple Jam                                        24
  Tomato Relish                                                       29
  Youngberry Jam                                                      19




                          THE STEPS TO FOLLOW


    [Illustration: untitled]

    [Illustration: untitled]

1. Prepare Fruit: Select fully ripe fruit. Wash, then prepare exactly as
recipe directs. If fruit lacks tartness add ¼ cup lemon juice when
adding sugar. For separating juice for jelly, use 1-yard square of
Canton flannel, spread over colander. Place prepared fruit in cloth,
bring corners together and twist while pressing down on bag. To make
jellies from dripped juice, use twice amount of fruit called for in
recipe.

    [Illustration: untitled]

    [Illustration: untitled]

2. Prepare Glasses: Wash, scald, and drain the glasses and tin covers
needed, and melt paraffin in a small pot over hot water while making
jelly or jam. Use new paraffin; old paraffin often causes spoilage. If
tin covers are not available, cut out circles of paper to paste over
tops of glasses.

    [Illustration: untitled]

    [Illustration: untitled]

3. Measure Sugar and Fruit: Use the same standard measuring cup, holding
½ pint, level full, for both sugar and fruit. If sugar is weighed, weigh
fruit also. To measure fruit for jam, pack solidly into cup until juice
and fruit come to top. If there is a slight shortage, fill last cup, or
fraction of cup, with water. If not quite enough juice for jelly, mix
water with pulp in jelly bag and squeeze again.

    [Illustration: untitled]

    [Illustration: untitled]

4. Cook Rapidly: For quickest jelly making, use an aluminum kettle or
saucepan—6 to 8 quart size. The kettle or saucepan should be less than
one-half full of sugar and fruit to permit a _full rolling boil_, a boil
which cannot be stirred down. Use hottest flame. If fire is slow, keep
kettle covered after sugar is dissolved until mixture comes to a boil.
Stir while coming to a boil, and while boiling.

    [Illustration: untitled]

    [Illustration: untitled]

5. Add Certo: For _jelly, add Certo as soon as fruit juice and sugar
mixture comes to a boil_; then bring to a full rolling boil and boil
hard for exactly ½ minute, stirring constantly. For _jam_, cook fruit
and sugar mixture at full rolling boil for exactly 1 minute, stirring
constantly; then _remove from fire and stir in Certo_. Time boil by the
clock.

    [Illustration: untitled]

    [Illustration: untitled]

6. Skim, Pour, Paraffin: Skim jelly and pour directly from saucepan into
clean, freshly scalded glasses. Skim and stir jam for 5 minutes by
turns. This cooling helps prevent floating fruit. Ladle into glasses.
Leave ½-inch space at top of each glass. Cover at once with ⅛ inch of
hot paraffin. When cool, cover glasses with scalded tin covers or
tightly pasted paper covers. Be sure to store in cool, dry place.

                New Certo Users: Read carefully pages 4, 5, 17, 18, 31.




                     TO MAKE JELLY and JAM TOGETHER


The recipes on this page and the next show how to make both jelly and
jam from the same batch of fruit. Here is the very latest short-cut in
jelly making applied to the two most popular fruits—strawberries and
grapes.


STRAWBERRY JELLY AND JAM


                       SPARKLING STRAWBERRY JELLY
                           _(also see page 8)_

  4 cups (2 lbs.) berry juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, place 5 quarts uncrushed strawberries in kettle. Add ½
cup sugar and mix. This sugar is in addition to 7½ cups specified above.
Cover kettle and heat gently until juice starts to flow, then bring just
to the simmering point. Place in colander or sieve lined with double
layer of cheesecloth. Drain 4 cups juice. (Use remaining fruit for Whole
Strawberry Jam below.) Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and
mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring
constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute.
Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


                          WHOLE STRAWBERRY JAM
                           _(also see page 19)_

  4 cups (2 lbs.) strawberries
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, use strawberries remaining from Sparkling Jelly above.
Measure sugar and strawberries into large kettle, filling up last cup
with the excess juice, if necessary. Mix well and bring to a _full
rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while
boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir
and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 10
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


CONCORD GRAPE JELLY AND BUTTER


                          CONCORD GRAPE JELLY
                           _(also see page 10)_

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, stem about 5½ pounds fully ripe grapes and crush
thoroughly. Add ½ cup water, cover, and simmer 5 minutes. Place in large
sieve lined with double layer of cheesecloth. Drain 4 cups juice.
(Remove cheesecloth and use fruit remaining in sieve for Concord Grape
Butter below.) Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix.
Bring to a boil over hottest fire; at once add Certo, stirring
constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute.
Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 10
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


                          CONCORD GRAPE BUTTER
                           (_also see page 22)_

  5 cups (2½ lbs.) prepared pulp
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare pulp, rub grapes, remaining from Concord Grape Jelly above,
through sieve. Measure sugar and prepared pulp into large kettle. If
necessary, fill up last cup with the excess juice or water. Mix well and
bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before
and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in
Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once.
Makes about 12 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


RED CURRANT JELLY

  5 cups (2½ lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, crush about 4 pounds fully ripe fruit. Add 1 cup
water, bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 10 minutes. Place fruit in
jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and juice into
large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once
add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and
boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at
once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


BLACKBERRY JELLY
BOYSENBERRY JELLY
DEWBERRY JELLY
LOGANBERRY JELLY
RED RASPBERRY JELLY
STRAWBERRY JELLY
YOUNGBERRY JELLY

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, crush thoroughly or grind about 3 quarts fully ripe
berries. Place in jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice. (If berries
lack tartness substitute ¼ cup lemon juice for ¼ cup prepared juice.)
Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil
over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring
to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim,
pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


SOUR CHERRY JELLY

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, stem and crush about 3 pounds fully ripe cherries. Do
not pit. Add ½ cup water, bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 10 minutes.
(For stronger cherry flavor, add ¼ teaspoon almond extract before
pouring.) Place fruit in jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice.
Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil
over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring
to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim,
pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


JELLY FROM CANNED FRUIT JUICE

Use _unsweetened_ juice. Follow recipe for fresh fruit jelly,
substituting ¼ cup strained lemon juice for ¼ cup of the fruit juice
specified. For fresh fruit jelly recipes, see Index to Jelly Recipes
(page 2).


ELDERBERRY JELLY
BLACK RASPBERRY JELLY

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) berry juice
  ½ cup lemon juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, remove larger stems from about 4 pounds fully ripe
berries; place in saucepan and crush. Heat gently until juice starts to
flow, then simmer, covered, 15 minutes. Place in jelly cloth or bag and
squeeze out juice. Squeeze and strain juice from 4 medium lemons.
Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil
over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring
to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove the saucepan
from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses
(6 fluid ounces each).


RED RASPBERRY AND CURRANT JELLY

  4½ cups (2¼ lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, crush thoroughly about 1½ pounds fully ripe currants.
Add ½ cup water, bring to a boil. Crush thoroughly 1½ quarts fully ripe
raspberries. Place fruits in jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice.
Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan; mix. Bring to a boil over
hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a
_full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour
quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


RHUBARB JELLY

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, cut about 3 pounds of fully ripe red-stalked rhubarb
into 1-inch pieces and put through food chopper. Place fruit in jelly
cloth or bag and squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and juice into large
saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add
Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil
hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once.
Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


GRAPE JELLY

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, stem about 3 pounds fully ripe grapes. Crush
thoroughly. Add ½ cup water, bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 10
minutes. Place in jelly bag and squeeze out juice. (Concord grapes give
best color and flavor. If Malagas or other tight-skinned grapes are
used, use 3½ cups grape juice, and add juice of 2 medium lemons.)
Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil
over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring
to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim,
pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


GRAPE JELLY FROM BOTTLED JUICE

  2 cups (1 lb.) juice
  3 cups (1¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. (If unsweetened
juice is used increase sugar by ½ cup.) Bring to a boil over hottest
fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full
rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour
quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 5 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


PLUM JELLY
PRUNE JELLY

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, crush thoroughly about 4 pounds fully ripe fruit. Do
not peel or pit. Add 1 cup water, bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 10
minutes. Place in jelly cloth or bag; squeeze out juice. (Sour,
cling-stone plums make best jelly. If sweet plums or free-stone prunes
are used, substitute ½ cup strained lemon juice for ½ cup of the plum
juice specified.) Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix.
Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring
constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute.
Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


GRAPEFRUIT JELLY

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, grate rind from 4 medium grapefruit, and squeeze out
juice. Add juice to grated rind and let stand for 10 minutes. Press
juice through small cloth. Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan
and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo,
stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½
minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes
about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


PEACH JELLY

  3 cups (1½ lbs.) juice
  6½ cups (2¾ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, remove pits from about 3½ pounds peaches. Do not peel.
Crush peaches thoroughly. Add ½ cup water, bring to a boil, cover, and
simmer 5 minutes. Place fruit in jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out
juice. Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a
boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then
bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire,
skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 9 glasses (6 fluid
ounces each).


APPLE JELLY (From Fresh, Tart Apples)
CRABAPPLE JELLY

  5 cups (2½ lbs.) juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, remove blossom and stem ends from about 3½ pounds
fully ripe fruit, and cut apples in small pieces. Do not peel or core.
Add 3 cups water, cover, and simmer 10 minutes. Crush with masher, and
simmer, covered, 5 minutes longer. (With soft, very sweet apples, add
juice of 1 lemon to prepared juice before measuring.) Place fruit in
jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and juice into
large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once
add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and
boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at
once. Makes about 12 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


MINT JELLY

  ½ cup apple vinegar
  1¼ cups water
  3½ cups (1½ lbs.) sugar
  Green coloring
  ½ bottle Certo

Wash 1 packed cup spearmint leaves and stems. Place in saucepan and
crush. Add vinegar and water. Bring quickly to a boil; remove from fire.
Cover and let stand 10 minutes. Add sugar and mix. Bring to a boil over
hottest fire, during which time add green coloring. Use coloring which
fruit acids do not fade. As soon as mixture boils, add Certo, stirring
constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute.
Remove from fire and skim. Strain hot jelly into glasses. Paraffin at
once. Makes about 5 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).

Or omit mint leaves and add ½ to 1½ teaspoons spearmint extract after
jelly is removed from fire.


GOOSEBERRY JELLY

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, crush thoroughly about 3 pounds fully ripe
gooseberries. Add ½ cup water, bring to a boil, cover and simmer 10
minutes. Place in jelly bag and squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and
juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and
at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling
boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly.
Paraffin at once. Makes about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


BEACH PLUM JELLY

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, crush thoroughly (do not pit or peel) about 4 pounds
fully ripe fruit. Add 3½ cups water, bring to a boil, and simmer,
covered, 30 minutes. Place in jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice.
Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil
over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring
to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim,
pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


QUINCE JELLY

  4½ cups (2¼ lbs.) juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, remove blossom and stem ends from about 3 pounds fully
ripe quinces. Do not peel. Grind; add 4½ cups water. Simmer, covered, 15
minutes. Place in jelly cloth; squeeze out juice. (If fruit lacks
tartness, add 2 tablespoons lemon juice to quince juice before
measuring.) Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan; mix. Bring to a
boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Bring
to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim,
pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


QUINCE AND CRANBERRY JELLY

  4½ cups (2¼ lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, remove cores, blossom and stem ends from about 1½
pounds fully ripe quinces. Do not peel. Grind fine; add 1 pound fully
ripe cranberries and 4½ cups water; bring to a boil, and simmer,
covered, 15 minutes. Place fruits in jelly cloth and squeeze out juice.
Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan; mix. Bring to a boil over
hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a
_full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour
quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


GUAVA JELLY

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) guava juice
  ½ cup lemon juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, slice thin about 2 pounds fully ripe guavas. Add 2¼
cups boiling water and crush thoroughly 5 minutes. Place in jelly bag;
squeeze out juice. Squeeze and strain juice from 4 medium lemons. (Add
red coloring, if desired.) Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan;
mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire, and at once add Certo, stirring
constantly. Bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute.
Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 10
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


WILD CHERRY JELLY
CHOKECHERRY JELLY

  3 cups (1½ lbs.) juice
  6½ cups (2¾ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, stem about 3 pounds fully ripe cherries. Add 3 cups
water. Bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 15 minutes. (For strong cherry
pit flavor, add 4 tablespoons crushed pits during simmering, or ¼
teaspoon almond extract before pouring.) Place fruit in jelly cloth or
bag and squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan
and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo,
stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½
minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes
about 9 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


RHUBARB AND STRAWBERRY JELLY

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  8 cups (3½ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, cut about 1 pound fully ripe rhubarb in 1-inch pieces
and put through food chopper. Crush thoroughly or grind about 2 quarts
fully ripe strawberries. Combine fruits; place in jelly bag and squeeze
out juice. Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to
a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly.
Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from
fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 12 glasses (6
fluid ounces each).


CURRANT AND STRAWBERRY JELLY

  4½ cups (2¼ lbs.) juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, crush thoroughly about 1½ pounds fully ripe currants.
Add ½ cup water and bring to a boil. Crush thoroughly or grind about 1½
quarts fully ripe strawberries. Combine fruits; place in jelly cloth or
bag and squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan
and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo,
stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½
minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes
about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


APRICOT JELLY

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) apricot juice
  ½ cup lemon juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, pit (do not peel) about 5 pounds fully ripe apricots.
Add ¾ cup water, bring to a boil, and simmer, uncovered, 20 minutes.
Place in jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice. Squeeze and strain
juice from 4 medium lemons. Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan
and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo,
stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½
minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes
about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


BLUEBERRY AND SOUR CHERRY JELLY

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, crush about 1 quart fully ripe blueberries. Stem and
crush about 2 pounds fully ripe cherries. Do not pit. Add ¼ cup water,
bring to a boil, and simmer, covered, 10 minutes. Place fruits in jelly
cloth and squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and juice into large
saucepan, mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo,
stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½
minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes
about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


PINEAPPLE JELLY

  3 cups (1½ lbs.) juice
  6½ cups (2¾ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, pare 2 medium, fully ripe pineapples. Chop very fine
or grind. Place in jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice. Measure
sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil over
hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a
_full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour
quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 9 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


SOUR CHERRY AND GOOSEBERRY JELLY

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, stem (do not pit) and crush about 2 pounds fully ripe
cherries. Crush about 1½ pounds fully ripe gooseberries. Combine fruits.
Add ¼ cup water, bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 10 minutes. Place
fruit in jelly cloth or bag and squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and
juice into large saucepan and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire and
at once add Certo, stirring constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling
boil_ and boil hard ½ minute. Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly.
Paraffin hot jelly at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


LIME JELLY

  ¾ cup (⅜ lb.) juice
  1¾ cups water
  4 cups (1¾ lbs.) sugar
  Green coloring
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare juice, grate rind from 5 limes and squeeze juice from 8 to
10. Add juice to grated rinds and let stand 10 minutes. Press juice
through small cloth. Measure sugar, juice, and water into large saucepan
and mix. Bring to a boil over hottest fire. While mixture is coming to a
boil, add coloring to give desired shade. Use coloring which fruit acids
do not fade. As soon as mixture boils, add Certo, stirring constantly.
Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard for ½ minute. Remove
from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 6 glasses
(6 fluid ounces each).


POMEGRANATE JELLY

  4 cups (2 lbs.) juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare juice, separate and crush the edible portion of 10 to 12
fully ripe pomegranates. Do not remove seeds. Place in jelly bag and
squeeze out juice. Measure sugar and juice into large saucepan and mix.
Bring to a boil over hottest fire and at once add Certo, stirring
constantly. Then bring to a _full rolling boil_ and boil hard ½ minute.
Remove from fire, skim, pour quickly. Paraffin hot jelly at once. Makes
about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).




               IMPORTANT DO’S AND DON’TS FOR JELLY MAKERS


DON’T—double Certo recipes. Better color and flavor and more certain
results are obtained from single batches.

DO—use fully ripe fruit of the best possible color and flavor. Taste
fruit, and if it lacks tartness, add the juice of 2 medium lemons (¼
cup) when adding sugar.

DO—prepare fruit exactly as the recipes direct. Do not simmer before
crushing or squeezing unless recipes specify cooking. For crushing
fruit, a food chopper is convenient.

DO—measure sugar and fruit exactly with the same standard ½-pint
measuring cup, level full; or weigh both. A standard measuring cup holds
½ pint sugar (7 oz. by weight) or ½ pint fruit or juice (8 oz. by
weight).

DO—use a large enough kettle so that your mixture has room enough to
boil _hard_. A kettle of 6- to 8-quart capacity is recommended. If the
6-quart size is used for jam, add ¼ teaspoon butter with sugar to reduce
foaming.

DON’T—confuse a gentle simmering boil with the _full rolling boil_
specified in Certo recipes. A full rolling boil is a high, tumbling boil
that cannot be stirred down.

DO—time the full rolling boil by the clock.

DO—stir and skim jams by turns for just 5 minutes before pouring. This
slight cooling helps prevent floating fruit.

DON’T—expose jellies and jams to dust or dampness after they are made.
Spoilage is caused by the growth of yeast and mold plants, which are
usually carried by dust. Use clean glasses, new paraffin, and clean
covers. Paraffin hot jelly and jam at once. Fill glasses only to within
½ inch of top. Store in a cool, dry place.

DON’T—judge the texture of your jellies or jams too hastily. Certo
recipes are designed to give an ideal set at the time they are most apt
to be used. Many grow progressively firmer for a week to a month after
they are made.




                           NEWS ABOUT PECTIN


Do you know that pectin, which helps you make delicious jams and
jellies, plays a role in medicine, too?

DOCTORS have long used apple pectin in the treatment of
diarrhea—especially with young children. Good results here have led to
further discoveries of the effectiveness of pectin in the treatment of
many intestinal disorders and also in the dressing of wounds and burns.
Pectin made by the makers of Certo is being used in several of these
scientific studies.

BECAUSE this is a subject of active scientific interest, it seems to us
news in which you might be interested. These facts are given solely as a
matter of information. The makers of Certo wish neither to prescribe nor
recommend.


BLACKBERRY JAM
BOYSENBERRY JAM
DEWBERRY JAM
CRUSHED STRAWBERRY JAM
YOUNGBERRY JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, grind about 2 quarts fully ripe berries, or crush
completely one layer at a time so that each berry is reduced to a pulp.
Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle, mix well, and bring
to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and
while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo.
Stir and skim for just 5 minutes to cool slightly to prevent floating
fruit. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 10 glasses (6 fluid
ounces each).

• New combination jams: Use above recipe, preparing 4 cups fruit from a
2-quart mixture of two or more of the berries listed above.


SLICED STRAWBERRY JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  6 cups (2 lbs. 10 oz.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, cut about 2 quarts fully ripe berries in halves
lengthwise; large berries in quarters. Add 1 cup sugar, mix and let
stand 15 minutes. This cup of sugar is in addition to the 6 cups
specified above. Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle,
packing fruit into cup; mix well, and bring to a _full rolling boil_
over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1
minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes.
Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 9 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


JAM FROM CANNED FRUIT

Use _unsweetened_ fruit. Follow recipe for fresh fruit jam, substituting
¼ cup lemon juice for ¼ cup of the prepared fruit specified. For fresh
fruit jam recipes, see Index to Jam Recipes (page 3).


RED CURRANT JAM
GOOSEBERRY JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush thoroughly or grind about 2 pounds fully ripe
fruit. Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle, mix well, and
bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before
and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in
Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once.
Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


SPICED CURRANT RELISH

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush thoroughly or grind about 2 pounds fully ripe
currants. Add 1 teaspoon cloves and 1 teaspoon cinnamon, ¼ cup water and
¼ cup vinegar. Bring to a boil; simmer, covered, 10 minutes. Measure
sugar into large kettle. Add prepared fruit; mix well and bring to a
_full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while
boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir
and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


PEACH JAM
PEAR JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, peel about 3 pounds fully ripe fruit. Grind or chop
very fine. If desired, about 3 teaspoons spice may be added. (If peaches
lack tartness, add ¼ cup lemon juice in addition to 4 cups prepared
fruit.) Measure sugar and prepared fruit, tightly packed, into large
kettle, mix well, and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire.
Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove
kettle from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour
quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


FRESH PINEAPPLE JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, pare 2 medium fully ripe pineapples. Chop very fine or
grind, using finest knife of food chopper. Measure sugar and prepared
fruit into large kettle, mix well, and bring to a _full rolling boil_
over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1
minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes.
Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


RHUBARB JAM

  3 cups (1½ lbs.) prepared fruit
  5 cups (2¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, slice fine or chop about 2 pounds rhubarb. Do not
peel. Red-stalked rhubarb gives the best color. Add 1 cup sugar; let
stand 15 minutes. This cup of sugar is in addition to the 5 cups
specified above. If desired, add 1 teaspoon ginger. Red coloring may be
added, use coloring which fruit acids do not fade. Measure sugar into
large kettle, then prepared fruit, solidly packed, filling up each cup
with water. Mix well and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest
fire. Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute.
Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour
quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 8 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


RED RASPBERRY AND CURRANT JAM

  4½ cups (2¼ lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush about 1½ pounds fully ripe currants. Remove
seeds and skins by sieving. Crush about 1 quart fully ripe raspberries.
Combine fruits. Measure sugar into large kettle. Add prepared fruit; mix
well and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir
constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Then remove
kettle from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour
quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


FRESH APRICOT JAM

  3 cups (1½ lbs.) prepared fruit
  ¼ cup lemon juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, pit about 2 pounds fully ripe apricots, cut into small
pieces, and crush thoroughly or grind. Do not peel. Squeeze juice of 2
medium lemons. Measure sugar, prepared fruit, and lemon juice into large
kettle, mix well, and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire.
Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove
from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly.
Paraffin at once. Makes about 9 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


DRIED APRICOT JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, add 3½ cups water and juice of 1 lemon to ½ pound
apricots. Cover, let stand 4 hours or overnight. Drain, grind or chop
fine, and mix with juice. Measure sugar into large kettle, add prepared
fruit. Mix well, bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir
constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from
fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly.
Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


GRAPE JAM

  5 cups (2½ lbs.) prepared fruit
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, slip skins from about 3½ pounds fully ripe grapes.
Simmer pulp, covered, 5 minutes. Remove seeds by sieving. Chop or grind
skins and add to pulp. (If wild grapes, Malagas, or other tight-skinned
grapes are used, stem, crush, and simmer with ½ cup water 30 minutes.
Sieve and measure. Use 4½ cups prepared fruit and ¼ cup lemon juice.)
Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle, mix well, and bring
to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and
while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo.
Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about
12 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


FRESH FIG JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  ½ cup lemon juice
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, remove stem ends from about 3 pounds fully ripe black
figs. (With white figs, add 4 cups boiling water and ¼ cup soda; let
stand 5 minutes, then pour off liquid, wash thoroughly and drain.) Crush
thoroughly or grind. Squeeze juice of 4 medium lemons. Measure sugar,
prepared fruit, and lemon juice into large kettle, mix well, and bring
to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and
while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove kettle from fire and stir in
Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once.
Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


DRIED FIG JAM

  3 cups (1¾ lbs.) prepared fruit
  5 cups (2¼ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, chop fine ¾ pound stemmed stewing figs. Add 2 cups
water and juice of 2 medium lemons; mix. Measure sugar into large
kettle, add prepared fruit, filling up the last cup with water if
necessary. Mix well, bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire.
Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove
from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly.
Paraffin at once. Makes about 9 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


GOOSEBERRY AND RED RASPBERRY JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  6½ cups (2¾ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush thoroughly or grind about 1 pound fully ripe
gooseberries and 1 quart fully ripe raspberries. Combine fruits. Measure
sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle, mix well, and bring to a
_full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while
boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir
and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 10
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


DRIED APRICOT AND PINEAPPLE JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, add 2 cups water to ¼ pound apricots. Cover and let
stand 4 hours or overnight. Drain fruit, grind or chop fine, and mix
with juice. Crush well or grind 1 medium, fully ripe pineapple or use 1
No. 2 can crushed pineapple. Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large
kettle. Mix well and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire.
Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Then
remove kettle from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes.
Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


STRAWBERRY AND PINEAPPLE JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush completely or grind about 1 quart fully ripe
berries. Each berry must be reduced to a pulp. Cut fine or grind 1
medium fully ripe pineapple or use 1 No. 2 can crushed pineapple.
Combine fruits. Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle, mix
well, and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir
constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from
fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly.
Paraffin at once. Makes about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


BLUEBERRY JAM
HUCKLEBERRY JAM

  4½ cups (2¼ lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush about 1½ quarts fully ripe berries. Add juice of
1 medium lemon and grated rind of ½ lemon. Measure sugar and prepared
fruit into large kettle, mix well, and bring to a _full rolling boil_
over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1
minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes.
Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 12 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).


GRAPE CONSERVE

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  ¼ cup lemon juice
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 cup nut meats, finely chopped
  ½ lb. seeded raisins
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, stem and crush well about 3 pounds fully ripe grapes.
Add ¼ cup water and simmer, covered, 30 minutes. Remove seeds and skins
by sieving. If desired, prepare grapes as in Grape Jam (page 22).
Squeeze juice from 2 lemons and grate rind. Measure sugar into large
kettle. Add nut meats, raisins, lemon juice, rind, and prepared fruit,
filling up the last cup with water if necessary. Mix well and bring to a
_full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while
boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir
and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 12
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


PEACH MARMALADE

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, peel off the yellow rind of 1 orange and 1 lemon with
a sharp knife, leaving as much of the white part on the fruit as
possible. Put yellow rinds through the food chopper twice. Add ¾ cup
water and ¹/₁₆ teaspoon soda to ground rind and simmer, covered, for 10
minutes. Cut off the tight skin of the peeled fruit and slip the pulp
out of each section. Add pulp and juice and the juice of an additional
lemon to the rind, and simmer, covered, 20 minutes longer. Peel about 1½
pounds fully ripe peaches. Pit and grind or chop very fine. Then combine
fruits.

Measure sugar into large kettle. Add prepared fruit, filling up the last
cup with water if necessary. Mix well, bring to a _full rolling boil_
over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1
minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes.
Pour quickly. Paraffin hot marmalade at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6
fluid ounces each).


PLUM JAM
PRUNE JAM

  4½ cups (2¼ lbs.) prepared fruit
  7½ cups (3¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, pit about 3 pounds fully ripe fruit. Do not peel. Cut
into small pieces and crush thoroughly. Add ½ cup water and simmer,
covered, 5 minutes. (Sour, cling-stone plums give best color and flavor.
If sweet plums or free-stone prunes are used, substitute ½ cup lemon
juice for ½ cup of the prepared fruit specified.) Measure sugar and
prepared fruit into large kettle, mix well, and bring to a _full rolling
boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while boiling. Boil
hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5
minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11 glasses (6 fluid
ounces each).


CHERRY JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, pit about 2½ pounds fully ripe cherries. Crush
thoroughly or grind. (If sweet cherries are used, substitute ¼ cup lemon
juice for ¼ cup of the prepared fruit specified. For stronger cherry
flavor, add ¼ teaspoon almond extract before pouring.) Measure sugar
into large kettle. Add prepared fruit, packing each cup solidly and
filling up the last cup with water, if necessary. Mix well and bring to
a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and
while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo.
Then stir and skim by turns for just 5 minutes to cool slightly, to
prevent floating fruit. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


SWEET CHERRY CONSERVE

Use recipe for Cherry Jam (above), adding juice and grated rind of 2
medium lemons, ½ pound chopped, seeded raisins, and 1 cup finely chopped
nut meats when sugar is added to prepared fruit. Makes about 13 glasses
(6 fluid ounces each).


CITRUS FRUIT MARMALADE

  3½ cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  5 cups (2¼ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, remove skins in quarters. Lay quarters flat, shave off
and discard about ½ of white part. With a very sharp knife, cut
remaining rind into fine shreds. Add 1½ cups water and ⅛ teaspoon soda.
Bring to a boil and simmer, covered, for just 10 minutes, stirring
occasionally. Cut off tight skin of peeled fruit and slip pulp out of
each section. Do not drain cooked rind, add pulp and juice and 1 cup
sugar. This 1 cup sugar is in addition to the 5 cups specified above.
(If oranges are very sweet, add juice of 1 extra medium lemon.) Simmer,
covered, 20 minutes longer.

Measure sugar and prepared fruit, solidly packed, into large kettle,
flooding each cup with juice, or if necessary, with water. Mix well and
bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before
and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in
Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once.
Makes about 8 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).

• For Orange Marmalade, use 3 medium oranges and 2 medium lemons.

• For Grapefruit Marmalade, use 2 medium grapefruit.

• For Orange and Grapefruit Marmalade, use 2 medium oranges and 1 small
grapefruit.

• For Orange, Grapefruit, and Lemon Marmalade, use 1 of each fruit of
medium size.


QUINCE JAM

  5 cups (2½ lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, peel and core about 3 pounds fully ripe quinces.
Grind, using finest knife of food chopper. Add 1½ cups water and juice
of 1 lemon. Bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 15 minutes. Measure sugar
and prepared fruit into large kettle, mix well, and bring to a _full
rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while
boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir
and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


CRANBERRY JAM
SPICED CRANBERRY JAM
CRANBERRY CONSERVE

  7½ cups (3¾ lbs.) prepared fruit
  5½ cups (2 lbs. 6 oz.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, add 4 cups water to about 2 pounds fully ripe
cranberries. (For Spiced Cranberry Jam, add ½ teaspoon ground cloves and
1 teaspoon cinnamon; for Cranberry Conserve, add 1 cup seeded raisins,
chopped.) Bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 10 minutes. Sieve pulp, if
desired. Measure sugar into large kettle. Add prepared fruit, mix well
and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly
before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir
in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once.
Makes about 12 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


CRANBERRY MARMALADE

  6 cups (3 lbs.) prepared fruit
  8 cups (3½ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, quarter 2 oranges and 1 lemon, seed, slice thin. Add 3
cups water and ⅛ teaspoon soda; bring to a boil, cover, and simmer 15
minutes. Add about 1 pound fully ripe cranberries and simmer, covered,
10 minutes longer. Measure sugar into large kettle. Add prepared fruit,
filling up the last cup with water if necessary. Mix well and bring to a
_full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while
boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo. Stir
and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 13
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


GINGER MARMALADE

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) prepared fruit
  2 cups (1 lb.) crystallized ginger, chopped
  4½ cups (2 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

Use 3 medium oranges and 1 medium lemon. Add ginger with sugar. Follow
recipe for Citrus Fruit Marmalade (page 27). Makes about 10 glasses (6
fluid ounces each).


BLACK RASPBERRY JAM

  3½ cups (1¾ lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush thoroughly or grind about 2½ quarts fully ripe
black raspberries. Sieve part of pulp to remove some of seeds. Add juice
of 2 medium lemons. Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle,
mix well, and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir
constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from
fire and stir in Certo. Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly.
Paraffin hot jam at once. Makes about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


RED RASPBERRY JAM
LOGANBERRY JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  6½ cups (2¾ lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush or grind about 2 quarts fully ripe berries.
Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle, mix well, and bring
to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and
while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir in Certo.
Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about
10 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


TOMATO RELISH

  3 cups (1½ lbs.) prepared tomatoes
  6½ cups (2¾ lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare tomatoes, scald, peel, and crush about 2½ pounds ripe
tomatoes, or use canned tomatoes. Boil 4 cups crushed tomatoes 20
minutes, uncovered, stirring occasionally. Add ¼ cup lemon juice and
grated rind of 1 lemon. (For use with meats, add Worcestershire sauce to
taste or ½ teaspoon each ground cloves, allspice, and cinnamon.) Measure
sugar into large kettle. Add prepared tomatoes, mix well and bring to a
_full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly before and while
boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove kettle from fire and stir in Certo.
Stir and skim for 5 minutes. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about
9 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


CANNED PINEAPPLE JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  1 bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, use canned crushed pineapple. Add juice of 2 medium
lemons. Measure sugar and prepared fruit into large kettle, mix well,
and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir constantly
before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from fire and stir
in Certo. Stir and skim by turns for just 5 minutes to cool slightly, to
prevent floating fruit. Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 11
glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


STRAWBERRY AND RHUBARB JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, grind about 1 quart fully ripe strawberries, or crush
completely one layer at a time so that each berry is reduced to a pulp.
Slice fine or chop (do not peel) about 1 pound rhubarb. Red-stalked
rhubarb gives best color. Combine fruits. Measure sugar and prepared
fruit into large kettle, filling up last cup with water if necessary.
Mix well and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir
constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from
fire and stir in Certo. Then stir and skim by turns for just 5 minutes
to cool slightly, to prevent floating fruit. Pour quickly. Paraffin hot
jam at once. Makes about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces each).


BLUEBERRY AND RED RASPBERRY JAM

  4 cups (2 lbs.) prepared fruit
  7 cups (3 lbs.) sugar
  ½ bottle Certo

To prepare fruit, crush or grind about 1 quart each fully ripe
blueberries and raspberries. Combine fruits. Measure sugar and prepared
fruit into large kettle, filling up last cup with water if necessary.
Mix well and bring to a _full rolling boil_ over hottest fire. Stir
constantly before and while boiling. Boil hard 1 minute. Remove from
fire and stir in Certo. Then stir and skim by turns for just 5 minutes.
Pour quickly. Paraffin at once. Makes about 10 glasses (6 fluid ounces
each).




                        PERFECT JAMS AND JELLIES


Have you ever stopped to think why certain jellies and jams walk off
with the blue ribbons in jelly-contests and win cheers from all the
family ... just what does stand for perfection in a jelly or a jam?

The Bureau of Home Economics “Score Card for Jelly” rates jellies for
flavor, texture, and color, and gives 78% of a score of 100 for perfect
flavor and texture. Flavor is defined as “free from excessive sweetness,
acid, or overcooked flavor”; perfect texture is “jelly that holds its
shape when turned onto a plate, but quivers when the plate is moved.”


                         Why Certo Recipes Win

Certo jelly recipes are developed with fully ripe fruit instead of the
under-ripe fruit commonly used in old-fashioned jelly making. They take
you a long way toward perfect flavor. And Certo jelly recipes are
designed to give best texture at the time the jelly is most apt to be
used. They take account of the fact that many jellies grow progressively
firmer for a week to a month after they are made.

About the ideal texture for jams there is far less agreement than for
jellies. Some prefer jams that hold their shapes, others like softer
jams. Either texture may be had with Certo jams. If a jam seems stiffer
than desired, break it up with a fork before turning out of the glass.

_The Short-Boil Method_: Scores of state fair champions in jam and jelly
making and millions of other jelly makers, too, use Certo and the
short-boil method of jelly making. They know they can depend on Certo
for sure results, time and money saving, and better, richer-flavored
jams and jellies.

You may find that Certo recipes call for more sugar than you usually
use. Remember that with Certo no fruit juice boils away in steam and you
usually get half again more glasses. Thus the extra sugar takes care of
the extra juice.


                HOW TO MAKE JAMS AND JELLIES WITH CERTO
                     _using 25% to 50% less sugar_

In any Certo recipe, 2 cups (1½ lbs.) of light corn syrup may be
substituted for 2 cups (14 oz.) of sugar required. Results will not be
satisfactory if more than 2 cups of corn syrup are used.




             MRS. A SHOWS MRS. B THAT CERTO PAYS FOR ITSELF


Mrs. A and Mrs. B both wanted to make some raspberry jam. Each had 2
quarts of berries to begin with and after cleaning and crushing them
each got the same amount of prepared fruit—4 cups.

Both Mrs. A and Mrs. B {9 o’clock} started at 9 o’clock.

Mrs. A added 6½ cups of sugar to her fruit. Then Mrs. A simply brought
her fruit and sugar to a tumbling boil, boiled for 1 minute, removed it
from the stove and added ½ bottle of Certo. The jam was done and it had
all of the flavor of fresh, ripe fruit.

                             {uncaptioned}

Mrs. A was finished at 9:12.

                                 {9:12}

Mrs. B added 4 cups of sugar. Then Mrs. B, following the old-fashioned
“cup for cup” recipe, had to boil her fruit and sugar about 30 minutes
before the jam thickened. This long boiling evaporated more than a third
of the prepared fruit and carried off most of the natural fresh fruit
flavor in steam.

                             {uncaptioned}

Mrs. B was finished at 9:45.

                                 {9:45}

Mrs. A got 10 glasses of jam from her 2 quarts of berries.

                             {uncaptioned}

Mrs. B took 3 times as long and got only 6 glasses of jam.

                             {uncaptioned}

Mrs. A had shown Mrs. B exactly what she meant when she said, “Certo
really pays for itself!”


                    Form P-2986    Printed in U.S.A.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

—Sidenotes are represented as headings or footnotes, as seemed
  appropriate.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SHORT CUT TO BETTER JAMS AND
JELLIES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
